# Translation-Networks_UROP
When I first joined Translation Networks in September, I was unsure of the exact direction that this project would take. Particularly encouraging, was our initial discussion about the various translations of Harry Potter, and what potential direction our work could eventually go on to take. Throughout the first semester, we covered various topics in the hopes that they would eventually shape the direction our 2nd semester would take. Among my top projects that we covered was the Six Degrees of Francis Bacon project, where extensive analysis of texts that were published in the 17th century enabled a connection map between various prominent English figures in that time period. But while these projects were there to give us some direction, the second semester was where the real work began. 

The start of the second semester saw us select Robinson Crusoe as our text, in part because that was the one which had the most translations available across the three target languages of Japanese, Mandarin, and Tamil. Furthermore, Robinson Crusoe’s extensive publishing history was well-documented, making it more accessible. Parsing through HathiTrust and various multilingual libraries, we were able to assemble an extensive corpus of 19th and 20th century translations of Robinson Crusoe. Though the Tamil side of that corpus was decidedly small, with just 2-3 translations available for use, one translation in particular offered a great deal of promise for our eventual end goal. This translation declared at the very beginning, that it was not meant to be an actual translation of Defoe’s work, rather an abridged translation intended for younger audiences. This meant that we could rather easily use this translation as an edge case, seeing whether or not certain semi-stable anchor points could be found in the translation, and then come to a determination about the story based on a lack of those anchor points. 

The overall goal of the project was to come up with a computational series of tasks, not relying upon language-specific elements or a literary understanding of the translations, but rather pattern recognition based on those aforementioned semi-solid anchor points. To that end, I drafted a Python script that had 2 main functions. The first of these, was to open a file from the user’s hard drive, preferably of the translation. The translated file would need to be OCR-ed and NLP compatible, with utf-8 encoding, a set of parameters which would eventually prove to be a roadblock. After opening the file in Python, I parsed through each line in the file, using the .split and .strip functions to create a mini-list for each line, called “words”. I then added each instance of “words” to a master-list called “words-per-line”. The “words-per-line” master-list was eventually used to populate a pandas dataframe. This dataframe created a matrix-like structure through which I could easily track the location of a word in the text, down to which line and which word in the line the desired word was located. From there, it was a simple matter of parsing through the dataframe, and printing the exact location of the desired word as a tuple. The same process, reproduced in the English version, gives us exact tuples for word locations, setting the stage up for a series of semi-solid anchor points to eventually lead us to our desired result. 

However, that is where some of the main issues with the project arose. With the general theme of our semi-stable anchor points surrounding numerical setups and orthographies - phrases like “four hundred and seventy moidores of gold” - we set out to find more of these anchor points that we could pinpoint. That is where we hit a major roadblock. The various editions of Robinson Crusoe, starting from Defoe’s original manuscript, saw a great many variations in these anchor points. Some would be lacking them, meaning that we cannot reliably reconcile these translations with any desired set of anchor points. That, and a significant disparity in OCR-readiness across our various texts derailed our effort to computationally solve this problem. Nonetheless, this foundational work has set the stage for future researchers to complete and expand upon, bridging the gap between the humanities and computer science in a way that reveals historical changes from a textual perspective. 


Won UROP Spring 2025 Symposium Blue Ribbon Award Certificate for Poster Presentation
